---
layout: default
title: "Operating Systems"
permalink: "/docs/fundamental_concepts/operating_systems"
parent: Fundamental Concepts
nav_order: 4
---

# Operating Systems
The computer [operating system](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Operating_system) is best described as the primary go-between for you and the computers hardware. Imagine a meeting between two diplomats of countries that don't share a common language. I'm assuming a meeting like that would contain at least three people: two diplomats, which represent you and the computer, and one translator, which represents the operating system.

The operating system, or OS, handles all the functionality that we've come to expect from a computer, like a nice graphical user interface, or managing tasks given to the computer by a human. It is, generally speaking, the first software layer that sits on top of the hardware and provides a framework to communicate with that hardware for other applications that sit on top of it. As a programmer, you will rarely, if ever, communicate with the OS directly to build your applications as it is most often handled by other software you will import to your projects, but it's worth knowing roughly what the OS does and does not do. I won't do a detailed explanation of what an OS does and does not do mostly because you could write an entire book on operating systems and still not cover every topic, instead I'll give you a quick discussion of the different types of operating system out there.

---

Today, there is really only three types of OS that you need to think about: [Windows](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_Windows), [Linux](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linux), and [macOS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MacOS). Windows and macOS are both geared towards general use by the vast majority of people. They are both characterised by clean and intuitive interfaces with a wide variety of applications built right in to the operating system. They are also built to be very __secure__ and reliable for almost any user. To illustrate what I mean by this I'll share a juicy tidbit my father once shared with me about a term that used to exist in the tech support world: 'PEBKAC'. When trying to aid a client as someone in a tech support role, you might describe the problem as 'PEBKAC', to communicate frustration with an intractable case in a polite manner. But those in the know also know what it stands for: 'Problem Exists Between Keyboard And Chair'. Operating systems like Windows and macOS are fundamentally designed to accommodate literally billions of people, which means they also need to be efficient and safe to use for all those people. The last thing you want to do is give the user _too much power over the computer_, because someone will break it eventually and then come calling with a problem. This is especially important when you start building multi-billion dollar business on these operating systems, the OS simply cannot fail when that much money is at stake. So, to be blunt, Windows and macOS lock down large parts of the operating system to prevent the 'PEBKAC' problem from breaking the computer and causing knock on effects.

Linux is an [open source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_source) operating system, and it therefore diverges from this approach quite significantly; instead of taking away power over the computer it does the opposite and gives you (almost) full control over the operating system. One of the defining features of Linux is that all the files and programs that keep the OS running are freely available to you. You can look at them, edit them, and delete them at will. This also means that you are entirely responsible for maintaining the computer and keeping those files safe. If you accidentally decide to delete part of the OS, that is _your_ fault.

For reasons that should now be clear, programmers and techie people in general love Linux, because accessing the operating system is just so much easier. You don't have to worry about getting round all of the lockdowns and restrictions that are present in Windows or macOS. Having that power over the OS tools also allows you to build applications quicker and more efficiently, to accomplish your goal faster. So if you really want to get into programming, especially if you are an astronomer or physicist, __you should absolutely learn to love Linux__. Be sure to research how it works and understand how to use it effectively because it is most likely the OS you will be using for work-related problems. Certainly, within radio astronomy most applications don't even run on Windows and require either macOS or Linux. Since Linux is open source, anyone can contribute to the Linux project and make their own 'flavour' of Linux. Consequently, there are many flavours of Linux out there and most of them are the same as the next one with only minor tweaks. That being said, here are some suggestions for your first choice of Linux OS:

- __Ubuntu__, the most generic, practical, and popular flavour of Linux. __If in doubt, pick Ubuntu__
- __Fedora__, the free alternative to the Red Hat implementation that is popular in business/enterprise applications
- __Arch Linux__, I shouldn't even mention this to beginners, but if you're a massive nerd like me you might enjoy having a go at installing Arch Linux. It is a barebones Linux flavour that delegates a lot of work to you. You can learn a lot about Linux just by using Arch Linux, but don't expect an easy experience.

Just a final note on macOS. While it has a lot of the same functionality as Linux, as they are both derived from the [Unix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix) operating system that existed many years ago, I personally don't recommend it just based on real-world reasons. Apple products, for some reason, cost twice as much for the same performance. Get a laptop and install Linux on it for half the price, simple as.

