---
layout: default
title: "Preface"
permalink: "/preface"
nav_order: 1
---

# Preface
Astronomers are capable programmers, and regularly create some of the most amazing software. Outside of radio astronomy, the subject of my PhD, results such as the [millennium simulation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Millennium_Run) are a clear testament to the skill of astronomers as software developers. Despite a wide variety of examples in favour of astronomer's skill as programmers, there's still a problem. One thing that most people do not know, is that almost all astronomers and physicists are completely self-taught programmers. In most cases this is driven by necessity; we start by writing scripts to do simple tasks like calculating $$x^3$$ over a set of input $$x$$ values. Then, slowly, we challenge ourselves to build more complex programs using more advanced techniques driven by our research goals. Many undergraduate students studying Physics and Astronomy go through this same process time and time again, and receive little to no guidance on the fundamentals of programming or computer science, let alone building efficient and scalable applications. I dread to think how much tax money is lost, how many labour hours are wasted, how much mental stress is caused, just because our Physics and Astronomy researchers receive inadequate training in using the most useful tool ever to come into science: the computer.

There is something to be said for learning a skill independently, it is a valuable skill and in certain cases it is preferable. In my opinion, for astronomers specifically, programming is not one of those cases. Most astronomers only do it because they have to, because it allows them to conduct whatever investigation they are really interested in. It is nothing more than a means to an end. This (perfectly understandable) lack of interest, in my experience, translates to poorly written code that plagues astronomy as a whole and ultimately slows everyone down. In particular, this software environment hurts the undergraduate student most of all, because before they can even begin using these applications to learn about their field of interest they have to first learn how to use this clunky software, perform bugfixes, and even rewrite bits of code in the worst case. This problem is even worse in the software intense field of radio astronomy, an area with an already high barrier-to-entry given the ridiculously complex observing technique of [interferometry](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Astronomical_interferometer). When I consider this complexity, combined with the clunky software in use across astronomy, I stop wondering why there are precious few new radio astronomers.

This guide will be my attempt at guiding new students of science into the wonderful world of programming, and then (hopefully) radio astronomy. It will differ from most other teaching resources on the internet by first introducing some very fundamental concepts, more basic than what most 'guides' and 'tutorials' will offer. The concepts might seem simple, alien and unconnected at first but I promise you in the long run, a good knowledge of these fundamentals will make everything a lot easier. We're not going to be diving into code right away; building _understanding_ takes time and patience, despite what a youtube video might tell you.

Finally, as a disclaimer, I am far from an expert. I am an astronomer, not a full-time software developer. I am a PhD student, not an experienced teacher. My hope is that my fascination with computers, the education I received from a particularly excellent computer science high school teacher, followed by my training in physics and astronomy, allows me to approach the topic of programming from a very different place than most experienced software developers. I have gone through many headaches, scribbled over many a notebook, and written thousands of lines of crappy, useless code. My hope is I can help you to avoid all that. What is written in the following sections will not address every pedantic detail, and there are often extreme cases that are left unaddressed for the sake of overall understanding.

I welcome you, and I hope you find what you read here useful. If you have any suggestions, or find anything missing or incorrect, you are more than welcome [contact me](/aboutme).